                                           MODEL UNITED NATION
Committee: Human Rights Council
Agenda: Effects of moneylaundering on economic status of country with special emphasis on cryptocurrency
Country: Spain

Introduction:

•Spain is a country on Europe’s Iberian Peninsula. It includes 17 autonomous regions with diverse geography 
and cultures.It's capital is Madrid.
•Its territory also includes two archipelagoes: the Canary Islands off the coast of Africa, and the Balearic 
Islands in the Mediterranean Sea.
•The African enclaves of Ceuta, Melilla, and Peñón de Vélez de la Gomera make Spain the only European country
to have a physical border with an African country.Several small islands in the Alboran Sea are also part of 
Spanish territory.
•The country's mainland is bordered to the south and east by the Mediterranean Sea except for a small land 
boundary with Gibraltar;to the north and northeast by France, Andorra, and the Bay of Biscay; and to the 
west and northwest by Portugal and the Atlantic Ocean.
•With an area of 505,990 km2, Spain is the largest country in Southern Europe, the second largest country in 
Western Europe and the European Union, and the fourth largest country in the European continent.
•By population, Spain is the sixth largest in Europe and the fifth in the European Union. Spain's capital and
largest city is Madrid; other major urban areas include Barcelona, Valencia, Seville, Málaga and Bilbao.

Detail on problems with reason with country's stance:

• Impressive growth / stubborn unemployment-
When the property bubble burst, jobs were destroyed as quickly as they had been created. As construction is a 
labor intensive sector, itcollapse reverberated through other areas of the economy. Between 2002 and 2007, the 
total number of jobholders,many of them on temporary contracts, rose by a massive 4.1 million, a much steeper 
rise than in any other EU country and more than three times higher than the number created in the preceding 16
years. Since 2008, more than 3 million jobs have been lost, around half of them in the construction and related 
sectors.

• The property sector caused a banking crisis and corruption to flourish-
The 45 regionally-based and unlisted savings banks, which accounted for around half Spain’s financial system, 
were closely connected to politicians and businessmen.Bad loans soared from 0.7% of total credit in 2007 to 
more than 13%. The European Stability Mechanism came to the rescue of some banks in 2012 with a €41 billion 
bail-out package in return for sweeping reforms.pain was ranked 40th out of 177 countries in the latest 
corruption perceptions ranking by the Berlin-based Transparency International, down seven places from the year 
before. Its score of 59 was six points lower than its previous score in 2012, in a numerical index where the 
cleanest countries are those closest to a score of 100. 

• Labor market laws were too rigid-
Spain has a dysfunctional labor market: even at the peak of the economic boom in 2007, the unemployment rate 
was 8%, a high rate by US standards. At the hiring end, Spain’s labor market laws were very flexible, largely 
as a result of widespread use and abuse of temporary contracts, but at the firing end, severance payments were 
higher than in comparable countries. This made employers reluctant to put workers on permanent contracts.

• The education system is in crisis-
One in every four people in Spain between the ages of 18 and 24 are early school leavers, double the EU average
but down from a peak of one-third during the economic boom, when students dropped out of school at 16 and flock
in droves to work in the construction. Almost one-quarter of 15-29 year-olds are not in education,training, or 
employment.Results in the OECD’s Pisa international tests in reading, mathematics for 15-year-old students and 
for fourth-grade children in the TIMS and PIRLS tests are also poor.

• Spain received more immigrants in a decade than any other European country-
Immigrants were lured to Spain when the economy began to expand rapidly. Their number soared from more than 
900,000 in 1995 to 5.7 million in 2012, the largest increase in a European country in the shortest time. When 
the economy went into recession, immigrants bore a large part of the surge in the unemployment, as many of them
were on temporary contracts and were the first to lose their jobs. The jobless rate among immigrants (37%) is
much higher than that for Spaniards (24%).

Combat Mechanism:

• Over the past 15 years in Spain, they used labour market regulations to their short-term advantage, offering 
mostly temporary contracts to new recruits and hiring workers relatively cheaply. This system did not provide 
incentives for on-the-job training; worker skills depreciated quickly as a result. The situation, however, can 
be easily addressed by the implementation of regulations aimed at establishing a single contract for all worker
.This will avoid the complexities brought by the existing multitude of types of contracts, simplify the 
system for recruitment, and allow the entry of more highly qualified recruits – the young – into jobs with a 
greater prospect of increasing productivity.

• Successful anti-corruption efforts are often led by a 'coalition of concerned' – politicians and senior 
government officials, the private sector, and by citizens, communities, and civil society organizations. 
Increasingly, successfully addressing corruption will require the concerted attention of both governments and 
businesses, as well as the use of the latest advanced technologies to capture, analyze, and share data to 
prevent, detect, and deter corrupt behavior.Provides leadership in creating international transparency standard
(Global Initiative on Financial Transparency, Open Contracting Standards, Asset Disclosure Standards) and 
support for the implementation of open government (through support for the Open Government Partnership).
Actively assists in the implementation of transparency and accountability efforts such as Extractive Industries
Transparency Initiative (EITI), Publish What You Pay, Fisheries Transparency, Anti-Money Laundering rules.
Strategically supports and engages in international alliances and regional anti-corruption forums, such as the
International Corruption Hunters Alliance and LAC Regional Parliamentary Network.Engages in international forum 
on anti-corruption including the G20 Anti-Corruption Working Group, the Financial Accountability Task Force, 
and the OECD Anti-Corruption Task Team.Assists countries with the coordination and mutual legal assistance 
required to identify and return stolen assets, through its StAR initiative in partnership with UNODC.Helps 
countries identify possible source of illicit flows and how to address them through National Risk assessments 
in over 50 countries at the country level.

• “Demand” training, which consists of training organized by firms (jointly with training permits). In this 
case the initiative for organizing training comes from the company. “Offer” training, provided by the Public 
Administration, social partners or other organizations through an annual public tender.Funding comes from 
autonomous communities.They are usually, but not exclusively, directed at unemployed workers.Programmes 
combining training and employment.This category includes Workshop Schools, Craft Centres, and Employment 
Workshops.

• NGDOs have also been very active in creating guidelines and educational resources, developing activities 
such as school campaigns, informative activities,reporting activities, the preparation of specialized reports,
training sessions etc.NGDO documentation suggests that globalization is a challenge for DE which has the role 
of promoting a critical awareness of global citizenship.The Spanish Cooperation Strategy on Development 
Education defines DE as ‘A formal, non-formal or informal educational process which is constantly working,
through knowledge, attitudes and values, to promote a global society committed to solidarity, to combating 
poverty and social exclusion and to promoting sustainable human development’. Its four major dimensions are 
raising-awareness, training in DE, DE research and social action.Awareness-raising includes isolated, short-
term action focused on providing information, alerting the general public about the causes of poverty and the 
structures that perpetuate them.

Action proposal for Cryptocurrency:

The Spanish govt. has been very cautious and conservative with regard to cryptocurrencies, since Spanish laws
is highly protective of the rights of investors and consumers, and because during recession there has been 
large no. of cases of financial and securities fraud. Cryptocurrency can't be legally treated as money for 
legal tender. The law 46/1998 of 17 December, on introduction of euro as the national currency, provides that
from 1 January 1999 the national currency of sapin will be euro. This law cross-refers to Council Regulation
of 3 May,1998. Under Article 10 of this regulation, only banknotes and coins dominated in euros and valid in
other Eurozone countries shall have status oflegal tender in Spain and, more generally, the euro shall be the 
sole unit of account in legal instruments, whether under private or public laws. 

Closing Remark:

• The anti-money laundering measures applied by banks and notaries are strong, particularly Spain’s system for 
preventing the misuse of companies. However, implementation in other sectors is variable. 
• In its Mutual Evaluation of Spain, the FATF said the country faces a range of money laundering risks, 
including organised crime and drug trafficking, as well as ongoing threats from terrorism and terrorist 
financing.
• Spain’s evaluation, which looks at measures ranging from law enforcement to financial supervision, is the 
first comprehensive review of a country’s anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist financing system and the
first to be completed using the revised FATF Recommendations adopted in 2012.

